[MUSIC]
>> Kyle: Our next topic, composition.
And I know I said we'd try to stay
away from fancy sounding words.
So let me try to help explain
what composition really means.
Composition, in this sense is
about taking the output of
one function and putting it directly
as the input to another function.
So in other words,
instead of calling one function and
then calling another function,
we're gonna call one function and
its output is gonna become, at least
part of the input for another function.
And then the output of that could become
That's what we mean by composition from
a functionally programming perspective,
at a very, very simple basic level.
All right, so what would be an example
of a program that might need some
composition?
Well if I had a function called
sum that takes two variables and
adds them together,
that's a super useful function.
You can all add that to
your utility libraries.
Now underscore,
I don't even know if they have that yet.
I invented the sum function and
I invented the mult function,
which multiplies, even more powerful.
[LAUGH] I know, silly functions.
I don't have very much room on
these slides to show you codes so
I have to use simple concepts here, okay?
But if I wanted to perform an operation
like five plus three times four,
I'm going to have to compose
these two functions in some way.
I might compose them with state, I might
save them into a variable like I'm doing
with z, but now you can see that
I'm doing sort of an impure thing.
I have the side effect state.
If on the other hand,
I were to take the result of mult and
pass it directly into sum,
never saving it into some side variable,
then I haven't created an impure action.
I've simply composed two
pure functions together.
So right now this is an impure program
because there is some side effect state
that's happening.
Is it a side effect in the sense that our
program is gonna return different results?
No, because we don't use that z variable,
but
there's still a side
effect that's happening.
Z is still getting changed.
That is still a complexity that could
create issues for your debugging later.
So how could I reorganize this program so
that I wasn't assigning to some variable?
Well, I can simply pass in the result of
mult, calling mult with three and four and
passing its result directly into sum.
In a functional programming sense,
this is kind of a manual composition.
So I didn't assign to
some side variable state.
I just took the end result and
pumped it directly into this next program.
So, the outer program here is pure.
Even though technically,
at a functional, I mean at
a programmatic sense technically,
our programming language has to
temporarily store that variable somewhere.
But from the perspective of our program,
we've written a purer operation.
Is everybody following that?
That's why these concepts
build upon each other.
So composition is a way of reducing
the amount of side effects you have.
It is absolutely true
that this is not some magic silver
bullet that works everywhere,
because you're not always in control of
the design of your function signatures.
And if our function signature happened to
not work in such a nice way where we could
pass in a value like that or if one of our
functions needed to return two values but
the thing we need to pass it
to only needed one of those,
it gets a little more complicated.
Granted, that is absolutely true.
This is why we call this
functional-light programming.
We're looking for
ways to develop those instincts and
to whatever extent that you can develop
that instinct it may guide your
design decisions for
the way you write your functions.
You may write your functions assuming
that somebody may wanna compose
that with a different function.
That is not only the argument signature,
but also the return value signature.
So if we wanted to create a pure wrapper
around this to do this composition for
us, we could do it manually.
We could call it multAndSum and
pass in all of the values, x, y, and z.
And simply call mult and
then pass its value into sum,
that's a manual composition.
We can create ourselves a little
utility as a manual composition.